JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: tremendous loss of life
on one of the holiest
days of the Muslim calendar, the
latest on the stampede that has
killed hundreds during
an annual pilgrimage.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead:
MAN: Mr. Speaker. the
pope of the Holy See!
GWEN IFILL: A papal call to
action on immigration and
climate before a joint meeting
of Congress,
as Francis wraps up his trip to
the capital by visiting the
city's poor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, Making
Sense of America's uneven
housing recovery. How many are
still
struggling, as
foreclosures continue?
ELYSE CHERRY, Boston Community
Capital: This is the story of a
crisis that won't quit,
and it won't quit because we're
not focused on the difference in
how it impacts our lower-income
neighbors, as opposed to our
middle- and upper-middle-income
neighbors.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Tragedy struck the
Muslim world today, marring the
end of the annual pilgrimage
to Mecca in Saudi Arabia. At
least 719 people were killed
when worshipers panicked and
stampeded.
More than 860 others were hurt.
It was a scene of horror in a
place of holiness. Cell phone
video captured the gruesome
aftermath,
with bodies littering the
streets. Saudi officials said
the stampede started when two
waves of
pilgrims collided.
KHALID AL-FALIH, Saudi Arabian
Health Minister (through
translator): The accident was
caused
by overcrowding and also by some
of the pilgrims not following
the movement instructions of
the security and the hajj
ministry. However, this is God's
will.
GWEN IFILL: The disaster
unfolded in Mina, a valley about
three miles outside Mecca.
Separate surges of people met at
an intersection with Street 204,
a main road that leads through
thousands of tents to Al
Jamarat. There, the faithful
perform the symbolic stoning of
the
devil, a ritual of throwing
pebbles at columns.
But, on this day, many never got
there. Instead, ambulances and
rescue crews struggled
desperately
to get the injured through
packed streets to nearby
hospitals. Others were taken by
helicopter.
Survivors recall the sheer
terror of being engulfed.
WOMAN (through translator): We
were coming back from the
Jamarat, and on the way back,
I met my husband and he was
going to the Jamarat. The
pilgrims began pushing each
other and
they pushed people to the
ground. I was about to die.
GWEN IFILL: It was the second
major disaster of this year's
hajj season. Less than two
weeks ago, high winds sent a
giant construction crane
crashing into Mecca's Grand
Mosque.
It killed more than 100 people
and injured nearly 400.
The twin tragedies raised new
questions about safety measures
the Saudis have implemented
to prevent a repeat of past
disasters. The deadliest came in
1990, when at least 1,400
pilgrims died during a stampede
in a pedestrian tunnel.
Now Saudi King Salman has
ordered an investigation into
what caused today's stampede.
Aya Batrawy is covering the
story for the Associated Press.
I spoke to her from Saudi
Arabia a few minutes ago.
Aya Batrawy, thank you for
joining us. We know you're there
in Mina, Saudi Arabia, the
site of that horrific tragedy
today. One of the things we
watched, seeing this from a
distance, we wonder is, how
did it get so out of control?
AYA BATRAWY, Associated Press:
And that's what the survivors I
spoke to also are questioning,
how this could happen in 2015,
at a time when the Saudi
government has been hosting the
annual hajj pilgrimage
for decades now?
What the survivors told me was
there was a large crowd heading
toward the facility behind
me to perform one of the final
rites of hajj when another crowd
coming back from the facility
intersected with them. And at
that point, people started
shoving and trying to get past
one another.
And that's when people started
tripping, falling over each
other, falling over wheelchairs.
People were suffocating, bodies
were piling up. And the streets
just turned into complete
chaos and mayhem and, as we see
today, over 700 people dead, and
the death toll is expected
to rise.
I was there at the scene 10
hours after this happened, and
there were still bodies lying
on the ground. There were still
helicopters trying over trying
to ferry the wounded. There
were still bodies being picked
up. I saw emergency lights being
brought in, which means clearly
they're going to be working
through the night to try and
figure out what happened, as
well
as trying to get to people.
GWEN IFILL: As we have reported
before, this is not the first
time there's been this kind
of stampede at the hajj, and is
this -- are there safety
concerns that have been worked
out in advance by authorities
designed to avoid just this
outcome?
AYA BATRAWY: I mean, definitely,
authorities here spend billions
of dollars every year
to prepare for the hajj and to
make the hajj as comfortable and
safe as possible for the
pilgrims. They're spending $60
billion to expand the Grand
Mosque that houses the
cube-shaped
Kaaba, which is a central part
of the hajj, a location where
people go for the hajj
pilgrimage.
They have spent -- there's
100,000 security forces deployed
this year for safety, for
crowd management. There's 5,000
CCTV cameras set up everywhere
to monitor people for the
flow of the crowds. It's a
logistical challenge. And so
that's kind of the question now,
is,
how did this happen? Who allowed
these two -- what agencies --
what happened that these
two crowds were
able to intersect?
Because, normally, what happens
are that there are roads that
are just one-way, so that crowds
don't end up clashing into one
another, so there will be roads
that are one-way going
one way and roads going another
way, and that way pilgrims can
avoid this kind of thing.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned all of
the renovations and the money
being spent at the Grand Mosque.
And yet there was an accident
there also earlier this week,
where 100 people were killed in
a crane collapse. Do they
know what happened there yet?
AYA BATRAWY: There's still an
investigation into that crane
collapse, but I also spoke
with survivors there. It was a
horrific, horrific scene. It was
very unexpected.
People were praying, looking
toward the Kaaba. It was exactly
almost two weeks ago today
that it happened, when stormy --
a storm happened, a
thunderstorm, and wind came out
unexpectedly.
And one of the largest cranes
around the mosque that's
currently working on the
expansion
collapsed.
So, what authorities are saying
is that wind was the cause, but
they're also saying that
the giant construction company
the Saudi Binladin Group, which
was the operator of the crane,
was also partly faulted for not
following operating procedures
there.
So, obviously, this is something
-- there are two accidents that
have happened in the
last two weeks, extremely
devastating for the pilgrims
here. But also I think for the
king, whose legacy is tied to
the pilgrimage, his title is
custodian of the two holy
mosques,
in reference to two holy sites,
one of them being Mecca.
It's something that everyone is
taking very seriously and
everyone is planning to see
how, you know, this
can be avoided again.
GWEN IFILL: Aya Batrawy of the
Associated Press, thank you for
talking us on the scene
tonight.
AYA BATRAWY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In other news,
European leaders are promising
new efforts to process thousands
of refugees and migrants
reaching Greece and Italy.
The agreement early today also
includes more than a billion
dollars in aid for those still
in refugee camps in
the Middle East.
Meanwhile, the crisis stoked new
tensions along Serbia's border
with Croatia. Long lines
of cargo trucks backed up as the
rival nations cut off imports
and blocked traffic in a war
of words over the
flow of refugees.
ZORAN MILANOVIC, Croatian Prime
Minister (through translator):
All that the Serbian prime
minister
has to do is to stop this flow
of migrants, 9,000 in one day.
We cannot make 50 refugee
camps at the border. What we
have done so far is good, and we
can cope with 4,000, 5,000
a day, but above that, no.
NEBOJSA STEFANOVIC,
MD-BO Serbian Interior Minister
(through translator): Croatia is
behaving irresponsibly. By
imposing this economic
aggression, they are hurting the
economy of
both countries. Serbia is forced
to introduce countermeasures. We
are not happy about it,
but we have to protect our
state and our sovereignty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than 40,000
migrants have entered Croatia
from Serbia over the last
nine days.
GWEN IFILL: The president of
China arrived in Washington this
evening for a highly anticipated
state visit. Xi Jinping's plane
touched down at Joint Base
Andrews, after flying
cross-country
from Seattle. He was greeted by
Vice President and Mrs. Biden.
Xi has a private dinner with
President Obama tonight. He will
be formally welcomed tomorrow.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama will
meet with Russian President
Vladimir Putin on Monday in New
York for the first time in
nearly a year. The Kremlin said
today the focus will be Syria
and coordinating the fight there
against Islamic State forces.
But White House spokesman Josh
Earnest charged again that
Russia's military buildup will
do far more harm than good.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary: President Obama will
make it clear once again
that Russia doubling down on
their support for the Assad
regime is a losing bet. The
likely consequence of them doing
so is only to deepen and expand
the ongoing crisis in
that country. That doesn't serve
the interests of either the
Russian people or the American
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Earnest said
Russia's involvement in Ukraine
will be President Obama's top
item.
The talks will follow Putin's
address to the U.N. General
Assembly.
GWEN IFILL: In Yemen, an Islamic
State affiliate claimed an
attack that killed 25 Muslims at
prayer today. The suicide
bombing wrecked a mosque in
Sanaa, as worshipers observed
the holiday of Eid al Adha. The
bomber set off a smaller
explosion, then blew himself
up as people ran for the exits.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The government of
Colombia and that country's
largest rebel group now
say their long-running conflict
will end in the next six months.
The two sides announced
the deal last night in Havana,
Cuba, where peace talks took
place. A final agreement
would end more than 50 years of
fighting. The United States
welcomed the deal, but
Colombia's
conservative political
opposition condemned it.
GWEN IFILL: The scandal over
Volkswagen cheating on emissions
tests is expanding again. In
Berlin today, Germany's
transport minister confirmed
that rigged V.W.s expanded
beyond
the U.S.
ALEXANDER DOBRINDT, German
Transport Minister (through
translator): We were informed by
Volkswagen that there are
vehicles with 1.6-liter and
2-liter diesel engines in Europe
affected
by the manipulations. That is
why we will continue to work
intensely together with
Volkswagen
in order to determine what
cars exactly are involved.
GWEN IFILL: Eleven million
Volkswagen cars worldwide were
fitted with the software
responsible
for the emissions cheating.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the Senate balked again
at defunding Planned Parenthood
as the price of preventing a
government shutdown. Republican
conservatives have pushed that
plan. But they once again came
up short of the 60 votes needed
to advance a bill, but
only after the two parties
traded broadsides.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: By inserting into this
debate a meaningless,
losing attack on women as just a
waste of time, but they decided,
the Republicans have
decided once again to place
partisan, ideological agendas
over the well-being of the
nation.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader: There's no
reason to continue blocking
every
attempt to fund the government
or to protect political allies
that are mired in scandal.
So, I'm calling on colleagues
across the aisle to join us in
standing against a shutdown.
I'm calling on them to join us
in standing up for women's
health instead.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican Senate
Leader Mitch McConnell, as you
heard, is saying he opposes
shutting the government. He's
now expected to offer a
so-called clean bill to fund
operations
through December 11. It's not
clear whether House Republicans
will go along.
GWEN IFILL: The world's largest
maker of construction equipment,
Caterpillar, will cut as many as
10,000 jobs through 2018. The
announcement today is the latest
sign of a worldwide slowdown
in mining and energy
exploration. And that, in turn,
held Wall Street back. The Dow
Jones
industrial average lost nearly
80 points to close back near
16200. The Nasdaq fell 18
points. And the S&P
500 dropped six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Pope Francis before Congress, a
look at the message he's
delivered so far on his visit;
and Making Sense of the uneven
recovery in America's
housing market.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pope Francis
wrapped up his historic trip to
Washington, D.C., today.
And it started with an address
to Congress, one that was
notable for his call to action
on economic, political
and social issues.
William Brangham
begins our coverage.
MAN: Mr. Speaker, the
pope of the Holy See!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was the
first time those words have ever
been heard in the United States
Congress.
Pope Francis entered to a
standing ovation from the House
and Senate, and members of
the Cabinet.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church: I am most grateful for
your invitation to address
this joint session of Congress
in the land of the free and the
home of the brave.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Speaking
slowly in English, the pontiff
used the occasion to call for
action on several issues from
poverty to immigration. His
appeal encompassed the thousands
of refugees
arriving in Europe, as well as
Latin Americans coming to this
country.
POPE FRANCIS: We must not be
taken aback by their numbers,
but rather view them as persons,
seeing their faces and listening
to their stories, trying to
respond as best we can
to their situation.
(APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The pope also
urged lawmakers to address
climate change, and he called
for
the -- quote -- "global
abolition of the death penalty."
POPE FRANCIS: Every life is
sacred. Every human person is
endowed with an inalienable
dignity, and society can only
benefit from the rehabilitation
of those convicted of crimes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Democrats
applauded all of those things,
while Republicans especially
cheered when Francis alluded to
the church's longtime stance
against abortion.
POPE FRANCIS: The golden rule
also reminds us of our
responsibility to protect and
defend
human life at every stage
of its development.
(APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The pope
didn't directly address
Congress' current fight over
funding
for Planned Parenthood, but he
did ask Congress to put aside
its partisan divisions.
POPE FRANCIS: The challenges
facing us today call for a
renewal of that spirit of
cooperation,
which has accomplished so much
good throughout the history of
the United States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Afterward, as
the pope moved outside, members
of both parties were left
to contemplate his message.
REP. JOYCE BEATTY (D), Ohio: He
said to us that we have to do
more than just possessing
space. Translated to me, you
have to come here and stand up
for the issues. You have
to take a position, and you have
to make sure that you represent
all the people and to keep
that in mind.
SEN. DAN COATS (R), Indiana: I
think people appreciated the
fact that he recognized the
difference of opinion here about
how we should go forward, and he
was just saying we should
go forward, and there are ways
to do it that won't affect
people -- put people out of
work.
And I think we appreciated that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As for
Francis, there was more cheering
in store outside the west front
of the Capitol, where thousands
had gathered, hoping for a
glimpse of the pope. There, he
reverted to his native Spanish,
delivering a prayer for the
children in the joyful crowd
below.
MARISA SWANSON, Washington,
D.C.: This person that we read
stories about and who is
inspiring
so many people, Catholics and
non-Catholics, to see him in
person, incredible.
MAN: He radiates happiness. He
radiates happiness. He radiates
peace, which I need -- which I
think is something we
all need right now.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Later, the
pope traveled to St. Patrick's
Parish Church, where he
delivered
a prayer and met with some of
Washington's homeless. That was
the last event in the nation's
capital. After a short break, he
flew on to New York, the next
stop on his six-day U.S.
tour.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Washington,
D.C.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And our political
director, Lisa Desjardins, was
in the crowd on the west
front of the Capitol for the
pope's speech, and she joins us
now.
So, Lisa, it was a call to
action in what the pope had to
say. And we just heard both
Republicans and Democrats saying
they liked different parts of
what he had to say. You
have been on the Hill talking
to people. What have you heard?
LISA DESJARDINS: You know, what
I expected was to hear
Republicans say, oh, this is a
liberal pope, we agree with him
on some things, not on others,
but what I heard instead
surprised
me today. Both parties heard
a challenge from the pope.
And Republicans in particular,
for whom I think the pope
challenged perhaps on
immigration
and perhaps on climate change --
Democrats think so at least --
Republicans say they
heard some of their conservative
viewpoints on those issues,
Judy. They say, especially
on the environment, that his
tone indicated that he sees the
United States as a leader,
and especially a leader in
technology, like renewable
technology.
And I think that's such a great
example of what happened today
or what might be happening
from this speech. The pope's
words were so important and I
think carefully chosen. He
found perhaps areas where maybe
Republicans and Democrats can
find leadership room
internationally,
like on the environment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, does that
mean, whether it's minds
changing or agreement coming --
he
did talk about the polarization
in Congress and in the country.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you think that
means it may lead to something?
LISA DESJARDINS: I don't think
positions will change on
immigration. I don't think
they're
going to change on, say, Planned
Parenthood, abortion or the
death penalty.
But I do see a little room from
the pope on the issue of climate
and environment. And
talking to Republicans today,
they say perhaps, even if they
don't change, say, cap and trade
-- they're not suddenly all
going to be for something like
that that they see as a problem
-- but perhaps there will be a
dialogue where there's more
acknowledgment of a problem and
a more careful look from those
who don't see a problem at what
is going on in the environment.
Note the pope didn't use the
phrase climate change.
Republicans like that. They say
that
gives them room for a dialogue
on this subject and some say
they think there could be a
change
in how they approach it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, what about
beyond politics, whether we want
to talk atmosphere or whatever
word you want to use? Did you
sense, you know -- listening to
you and listening to what
some of the members said, it
sounds like they felt this was
really something different
happening.
It wasn't -- clearly just
another political speech.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is what's
remarkable. We have been around
these members so often.
They live in a strange world
where they are the powerful, and
they only are accountable
every two or six years.
But I think what happened today,
Judy, and even to a cynical
reporter like me sometimes,
is the pope made them more
human. I heard from Dan Coats.
He said there was a sense
of reverence in the chamber.
Debbie Stabenow said it was a
sense of humility. I think he
made these powerful people
remember that they are human and
that they have a human
responsibility.
That's what I heard again and
again from members who don't
usually talk like that. That's
what
was astounding. And they also
sort of got rid of that layer of
scriptedness that we're
so used to, even if for a few
hours today. We will see how
long it lasts. It was
remarkable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maybe
it will last.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's
right. I hope so.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will see.
Lisa Desjardins, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: And now we turn to
the next leg of the pope's trip,
and the anticipation and
security surrounding his
time in New York City.
He landed late this afternoon at
Kennedy International Airport,
where a crowd greeted him. He
took
a helicopter to Wall Street, and
then headed toward St. Patrick's
Cathedral.
Hari Sreenivasan was one of
those outside when I spoke to
him a short time ago.
Hari, I see you're front and
center there in from the of St.
Patrick's Cathedral. Tell
me, what's the security like in
the city? The city shuts down
when anybody comes to
town, but, with the pope,
it must be something.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's right.
Imagine a Super Bowl, multiply
that by four, and then
put it in downtown Manhattan for
a period of two-and-a-half days
or so.
I mean, this area up and down
Fifth Avenue -- if anybody has
been to New York, they have
probably been to Rockefeller
Center -- there is no traffic on
here. They have closed it
for several blocks in either
direction from St. Patrick's.
There's a place where he's
going to rest overnight.
That has security around it.
There's obviously Central Park
that is preparing. And then,
tomorrow, he has got four
different
places that he's going to in the
city as soon as he wakes up.
It's kind of a nonstop schedule
for him. And everywhere he goes,
there has to be this level of
security that goes with
him, ahead of him.
GWEN IFILL: We saw a little bit
of this here in Washington, but
it's not like what you
are going to see there. So, give
us a thumbnail sketch of his
schedule, where he's expected
to go and be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
For a man his age, it's pretty
impressive. After he does
vespers tonight, which is not
mass, but a church service
tonight with clergy inside here,
then he goes to rest tonight.
Tomorrow morning, as soon as he
wakes up, he goes to -- today,
he was trying to address
the nation of the United States
through its representative.
Tomorrow, he tries to address
the entire world at the U.N. And
after that, he goes to the 9/11
Memorial, where he has
an opportunity to pray and lead
people in a -- kind of a
multifaith service, if you
will.
From there, he goes to a school
in Harlem. And then he conducts
a very small mass at
Madison Square Garden. So, four
areas of the city that have to
prepare for him, and, you
know, they are actually
encouraging people in New York,
if you can telecommute tomorrow,
do so.
GWEN IFILL: They encouraged
people about that here in
Washington as well, but that
didn't
dampen the enthusiasm, except
with one extra detail. I gather
there are people actually
scalping free tickets
to see the pope?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes. That's
right. I don't think the pope or
the cardinals or anyone
that cares about this is very
happy about this, but, yes,
there were free tickets that
were handed out for the event
that he's going to have in
Central Park.
And, sure enough, on eBay and on
Craigslist, you can start to see
these tickets pop up
for hundreds of dollars. You
can't prevent the sale from
happening, but you can certainly
strongly discourage it.
GWEN IFILL: And, finally, Hari,
that crowd that we're seeing
behind you, how long would
you say they have all been
there waiting for this moment?
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, the press
was corralled together in these
-- sort of higher-security
area for several hours. And the
people on either side of me in
front of the church have
been here several hours as well.
But what you can't see is the
people that are up and down
Fifth Avenue, on both sides,
just waiting for a glimpse of
the Popemobile. Perhaps he's
going to wave. Perhaps he goes
out and takes a selfie with
them. I don't know. But the
people here are just as excited
as they were in D.C.
GWEN IFILL: Well, it's amazing
to watch, from city to city to
city, this thing unfold.
Hari Sreenivasan, thanks a lot.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some more
reaction to the pope's speech
and some of the issues he staked
out
from three important catholic
figures who attended today.
Jim Nicholson sat with House
Speaker Boehner. Jim was the
U.S. ambassador to the Holy See
from 2001 to 2005 and he was the
former chairman -- is the former
chairman of the Republican
National Committee. Sister
Simone Campbell led four
cross-country trips of Nuns on
the
Bus, which focused on economic
justice and immigration, among
other things. She's the
executive director of a Catholic
lobbying group, NETWORK. And
John Carr, who's been
working with the Catholic
Bishops Conference of
Washington, D.C., he's the
director of
the Initiative on Catholic
Social Thought and Public Life
at Georgetown University.
And we welcome all three
of you to the program.
SISTER SIMONE CAMPBELL,
Executive Director, Network:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John Carr,
well, to all of you, I thought
it was a remarkable speech.
John Carr, you pay close
attention to everything this
pope says. What stood out
particularly
to you today?
JOHN CARR, Director, Initiative
on Catholic Social Thought and
Public Life, Georgetown
University: Well, it was such a
different day on Capitol Hill.
He talked about people. He
talked about their stories. He
talked about faces. I watched
Vice President Biden and Speaker
Boehner, two Catholic kids from
Ohio and Pennsylvania.
They're old enough to remember
when John Kennedy was told he
shouldn't be elected president
because he might take advice
from the pope. And now the lead
parties, the only thing it
seems they agree on is they
need advice from the pope.
So, I was struck by how hard the
Holy Father was trying to reach
them. And English is not
his first language, and there
was more gestures, more energy,
and how hard they were
listening.
It was an extraordinary
day on Capitol Hill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ambassador
Nicholson, you're somebody who
has watched this city, watched
the politics of the city play
out for a long time. What did
you see today that was
different?
MDNM JIM NICHOLSON, Former U.S.
Ambassador to the Holy See:
Well, it was a different
kind of speech from the pope.
And I was very encouraged
because it was a real elevated
speech, and he started out by
affirming American values, you
know, the land of the free and
the home of the brave. And
he talked about the emphasis
that we have on freedom and
self-government and what that's
been able to do to enable people
in our country and to give them
hope and opportunity.
And he also said to us, he said,
you have a great system in
place. There are big problems.
Now apply that system and
help solve those problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it really
was, Sister Simone, a call to
action in many ways. He was --
he
referred to four -- he called
them great Americans who spoke
to the future, in Abraham
Lincoln,
Dorothy Day and others.
But what did that call
of action mean to you?
SISTER SIMONE CAMPBELL: Well, I
think what his call is, is that
we all need to work together,
instead of pull apart. He lifted
up the best of our nation with
Abraham Lincoln and the
quest for unity and freedom in
the face of the Civil War, Dr.
King and his quest that
all could vote and be engaged,
Dorothy Day to work with the
poor and to not make judgments
that leave people out.
And, finally, Thomas Merton,
which touched me the most, was
to say that all of this has
to be rooted in a reflective
space and in dialogue, that we
need to talk together to
make change, which is something
that has not been happening on
Capitol Hill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Carr, do you
think the pope came thinking, I
can really make something
happen in the United States,
in this political city?
JOHN CARR: Lots of people
thought he didn't know much
about the United States. He's
never
been here. And it was a very
respectful speech, as Jim said,
very respectful of our values,
our traditions and four
great American leaders.
I think he was calling us to our
best, but he is an outsider. He
looks at the world differently.
He looks at the world from the
bottom up and from the outside
in. And that is not Washington's
way. So, this was a different
message from a different
messenger. And we can only hope
that his call for dialogue,
true, but to watch for the least
of these, will ring a bell here
in Washington, because those --
those priorities have not been
here.
We're a city of polarization,
where the rich and powerful
often have their way. The most
powerful thing he did today was
not a paragraph from that
speech. He left Capitol Hill,
talking
to the most powerful legislature
on earth, and went to have lunch
with homeless people
who have no power at all.
So, he showed us by his actions
what we need to do. I hope they
listen. I hope they learn.
Frankly, I hope they
follow his example.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jim Nicholson,
there was some -- yes, he did
have something to say that
both ends of the political
spectrum could respond to, but
there's been interpretation
today that suggested it was more
-- it was a message that
resonated more with the
political
left.
Is that how you heard it?
JIM NICHOLSON: I didn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, on the
environment, on abolishing the
death penalty and so forth.
JIM NICHOLSON: Well, you can --
you know, there are things in
there that you can interpret
probably any way you want to,
but I think the transcendent
part of that talk was that
he was speaking to
our higher angels.
He was exhorting America through
its legislature to do more. I
mean, it was really -- it was
a Gospel message, and coming
from man like that, it has such
great credibility, if not
inspiration. My wife said
something interesting to me as
we were sitting there on the --
in
the gallery watching him come
in. And all of those people of
all stripes in those two
bodies jumped to their feet.
And she said, "Why do you think
they're clapping so much?" which
I think is an interesting
question.
And I think -- I think it's
because everybody is kind of
yearning for some spiritual
leadership,
some spiritual clarity. And this
iconic figure comes to
Washington, they close our city
down
because this one man comes here.
I mean, K Street, you could have
thrown a grenade down
there yesterday and
not hit anybody.
And why is that? And I think
it's just that he is trying to
appeal to our higher nature
and has done that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sister Simone, is
that how you heard it, more that
than as a political...
(CROSSTALK)
SISTER SIMONE CAMPBELL: He
definitely had a political
message. He was very clear on
the issue of immigration.
He said specifically that we are
a nation of immigrants and
that's why he feels at home.
His country is the same. And
then he said, we cannot be
afraid of the stranger. We must
welcome them in. We shouldn't be
afraid of the numbers. We must
see their faces.
That was a very direct
challenge, and I think, also on
the economy, speaking of the
needs
of those who are left out
in our very broken system.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, when it
comes to immigration, Jim
Nicholson, as somebody who has
led the
Republican National Committee,
are words from the pope
something that you think could
make
change happen, bring the
two parties together?
This is something -- most of the
Republican Party has been
opposed to immigration reform.
JIM NICHOLSON: Well, no, they --
there's been a lot of good
discussion in our party, and
good leadership, and attempts at
immigration reform. We know we
have a major...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, had a
different vision of immigration
reform, I should say.
JIM NICHOLSON: Well, it's a
conundrum, because we're also
nation of law, the rule of law.
And we have a lot of people here
who have violated the law to be
here. But they're human
beings. And now they have
offspring and they provide a lot
of useful function here.
So, what do you do about that?
And that's not an easy question.
And there are a lot
of real good people that are
concerned about that. And I
think the pope, you know, thank
God he might provide some help
in the mediation of that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Carr, is
there follow-up from this? Is
this something where the pope,
the Catholic Church stays
engaged on the points the pope
made today?
JOHN CARR: Well, I hope so. And,
actually, the church has been
engaged.
I was struck on the position of
the immigration. He didn't call
for HR-2012.
JIM NICHOLSON: No.
JOHN CARR: He called for us to
see the stories, see the faces.
The little girl who broke
through
the line yesterday, 5 years old,
talking about her parents --
immigrants are being demonized
in our politics right now.
The pope said, step back from
that. Look at the human stories.
Look at the faces. Remember
your own history. Truthfully, if
there was a secret vote on the
floor of the House, immigration
reform would pass. So, maybe,
just maybe we could take a step
back, think about the values
that are at stake, the
traditions the Holy Father
outlined, and actually come
together.
I think criminal justice might
be an area. I think lifting
people out of poverty. If
he gets Democrats and
Republicans to work together,
that might be his first miracle.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do
you see follow-up?
JIM NICHOLSON: That
would make him a saint.
(CROSSTALK)
SISTER SIMONE CAMPBELL: ...
probably make him a saint, I
really think we have hard work
ahead to -- because we have a
nanosecond memory in this town.
And so what we're doing is, next
Tuesday, 35 sisters are flying
in from around the country,
and we're going to do a lobby
day on the Hill. It's going to
be the midst of the high-tension
appropriations battles are
coming down the line. And we're
going to say, remember what
the pope said. We have to find a
way forward. Remember the least
of these.
Remember the best of our nation,
where we do create opportunity,
but we cannot leave
people out. And we must create a
budget that does those things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jim Nicholson, do
you see a lasting effect from
this?
JIM NICHOLSON: I'm not sure
of that, but I hope there is.
So, I mean, it's so memorable,
so unique when you think about
what went on here with this
one, you know, priest from
Argentina who came here to
America, and the effect that
it's
had on our system, and just
everything came to a standstill.
Every television set is on
and his movements, and
that's unprecedented.
And so maybe it may have some
unprecedented positive effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Though, I mean,
when he's -- for example, when
he says something, condemns
the arms trade and talk about
what it leads to, does that lead
to somebody moving on that
issue?
JIM NICHOLSON: Well, it could.
It gives people some authority,
because he has so much
credibility and has that, what
I call his powerful moral
megaphone. And when he speaks,
he's listened to. And it gives
people -- wherever they are in
these positions, you know, they
can sort of try to align
themselves
with the pope, and that does
help. I have that from
diplomatic experience and being
in Rome in -- with the Iraq War.
And it can make a difference.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN CARR: Well, because he
speaks for those who rarely have
a voice in Congress. And the
fact that they heard a different
voice with a different message
calling us to our best
selves, I hope it
makes a difference.
JIM NICHOLSON: Amen.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, on that
note, John Carr, Sister Simone
Campbell, and Ambassador Jim
Nicholson, we thank
you, all three.
JIM NICHOLSON: Thank you.
SISTER SIMONE
CAMPBELL: Thank you.
JOHN CARR: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
look at the state of Catholic
education in America.
But, first, years into the
economic recovery, some
homeowners are still struggling
to hang
on to their homes. The headlines
tell of strong home sales in
many major metropolitan areas,
even in cities where sales
prices have been shooting
skyward.
But there's another part of the
housing story, the places and
homeowners who have yet to
recover, even as prices
have remained low.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has that report, part of
our weekly series Making Sense,
which airs every Thursday
on the "NewsHour."
MAN: Go, go, go,
go. You all right?
PAUL SOLMAN: Cheryl and Donte
(ph) Ortiz are living proof that
the housing crisis is still
with us. When they bought their
Southbridge, Massachusetts, home
in 2004 for their large
family, half of the kids
adopted, they thought they'd
found their slice of the
American pie.
GIRL: I got you. I
got you. Come on.
PAUL SOLMAN: But six years
later, it looked like they would
lose it. Donte ruptured a
disk in his back at work and
became disabled. Cheryl's grad
school student loans came due.
They fell behind on the house
payments. But since the value of
their house had plummeted,
and in their neighborhood had
never recovered, even
refinancing wasn't an option.
CHERYL ORTIZ, Homeowner: The
mortgage company had no
compassion. They wanted to do
nothing
to help us, nothing. And I
finally said to them, I don't
know what you want me to do.
I'm explaining to you my
situation. You don't -- it's
like you don't care. And they
said,
well, it's your problem.
Put the house up for sale.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which they did, in
what's known as a short sale,
where the seller's asking
price doesn't cover
what's owed to the bank.
Now, what had you paid
for it initially?
CHERYL ORTIZ:
Initially, $250,000.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what were
you short-selling it at?
CHERYL ORTIZ: They brought it
down to as low as $149,000. And
not one person came to look
at it, no offers, nothing.
PAUL SOLMAN: After six months,
they pulled the house off the
market.
So, you mean there's been no
housing rebound at all around
here?
CHERYL ORTIZ: No, no, not here.
PAUL SOLMAN: But the news is
that, nationally, housing prices
are on the way back up.
CHERYL ORTIZ: Well, maybe
somebody should show me where
that is, because it hasn't
happened
here.
PAUL SOLMAN: Elyse Cherry, who
runs Boston Community Capital, a
nonprofit lender that
specializes in helping
underwater homeowners, says this
story is still a common place.
ELYSE CHERRY, Boston Community
Capital: This is the story of a
crisis that won't quit,
and it won't quit because we're
not focused on the difference in
how it impacts our lower-income
neighbors, as opposed to our
middle- and upper-middle-income
neighbors. In low-income areas,
the foreclosure
crisis continues unabated.
PAUL SOLMAN: Really? Unabated?
ELYSE CHERRY: Unabated.
PAUL SOLMAN: According to the
research real estate firm
Zillow, more than seven million
borrowers remained underwater in
June of 2015, over half of them
by more than 20 percent,
with homes in low-end
neighborhoods more than three
times as likely to be
underwater.
And this tale of two markets is
playing out across the greater
Boston area. David Greenidge,
a research data management
specialist, paid $250,000 in
2006 for his house in the
modest,
but well-tended town of
Fitchburg, Massachusetts, then
found it had soon lost about
$100,000
in value. After being between
jobs for several months, he too
fell behind, tried to refinance,
and got the run-around we have
been reporting for years now.
DAVID GREENIDGE, Homeowner: They
initially said, you know, let's
try to do a modification.
OK, fine. I sent them the
paperwork, like 60 some-odd
pages, all our information. A
month -- about a month later,
can you send us all the
information to do the
modification?
OK. I sent it to them again and
said, I just sent you this a
month ago.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, maybe the banks
were overwhelmed by the volume
of business, but like Greenidge,
Cheryl Ortiz wondered, why
wouldn't the banks make a deal
with homeowners at something
like
market rates?
CHERYL ORTIZ: What do you think
is going to happen to my house
if you take it? What is
that going to help you as the
bank? You're going to lose more.
But, no, I'm out, you
know, got to go, you're out of
the house, and we're going to
give it to somebody else
much cheaper.
PAUL SOLMAN: Nic Retsinas, who
teaches real estate at Harvard
Business School, says the
banks don't necessarily
want to work things out.
NIC RETSINAS, Harvard Business
School: Because the banks
necessarily aren't holding these
mortgages. They're often
bundle-izing them and
securitizing them and selling
them to
investors. Investors are very
nervous about losing any of
their principal. They feel
that's
inviolate. As a result, they
haven't done a principal
reduction. As a result, you have
these low values, particularly
among low-end homes, continue to
stilt the marketplace.
PAUL SOLMAN: So the bank is
simply afraid of setting a
precedent?
NIC RETSINAS: Yes, the banks
think this will be contagious,
and then they will lose their
investor base, who is very
concerned about ever losing
their principal.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, are you
sympathetic to the lenders for
not giving the homeowner the
same
deal that is actually a
price on the open market?
NIC RETSINAS: No, I think the
lenders have been short-sighted.
And because they have
been short-sighted, for the most
part, this housing crisis has
dragged on and on, and
it explains why the recovery
is so slow and so laborious.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is where Elyse
Cherry and Boston Community
Capital come in. For the
past six years, the
organization's Stabilizing Urban
Neighborhoods program has
refinanced
some $85 million in home loans
for people in default and
foreclosure.
PAUL SOLMAN: What you do is, you
buy the home at the current
market price, which is lower
than the original one, and then
sell it back to the owner.
ELYSE CHERRY: That's correct.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that works?
ELYSE CHERRY: Yes. We provide a
new 30-year fixed year mortgage.
We have some bells and
whistles attached to this to be
sure that we really get good
homeowners.
PAUL SOLMAN: Boston Community
Capital charges those homeowners
a interest rate than the
banks and shares in any
appreciation of the home for as
long as the loan stays in force.
As a result, says Cherry:
ELYSE CHERRY: We encourage
people to clean up their credit
as quickly as possible, so
that they can, in fact, go out
and get perhaps a cheaper
mortgage, take our mortgage out,
and cut off any shared
appreciation as early as they
can.
PAUL SOLMAN: Something the
Ortizes are already making plans
to do.
CHERYL ORTIZ: Now I'm in a
position to say, OK, now I can
start looking for -- to
refinance.
And I'm not going to have
somebody say, oh, you can't do
that because you're so far
underwater,
you will -- nobody is
going to touch you.
PAUL SOLMAN: One of the bells
and whistles that comes with the
Community Capital mortgage
is a biweekly payment regiment,
requiring borrowers to make 26
half-payments a year,
two more than needed to cover
their annual obligation.
The extra two goes
into a fund...
DAVID GREENIDGE: Exactly.
PAUL SOLMAN: ... as a cushion.
PAUL SOLMAN: Have you had
the use the cushion?
DAVID GREENIDGE: No, but we may
need to because our furnace is
very old. When the repairman
came, he noticed that we have
some pipe issues. The plumber
said, don't touch it, so your
finger might literally go
through. I'm going to submit the
estimate to fix that with Boston
Community Capital.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, is a program
like this the answer for a large
part of the housing market
that's still reeling? Elyse
Cherry herself says no. For one
thing, not everyone qualifies.
ELYSE CHERRY: You really have to
have enough current income to
support even a current-priced
mortgage.
PAUL SOLMAN: And Nic Retsinas
sees another limitation.
NIC RETSINAS: They don't really
have the capacity to do this in
large numbers sort of over time.
They're doing it in selected
markets. They're still running
into hurdles. They still need
the cooperation of banks. So,
yes, it's a great idea. It makes
a lot of sense. Whether
it can get to a scale to make a
difference, I'm not so sure.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, for Cheryl
Ortiz, at least, it's given her
family room to breathe.
CHERYL ORTIZ: We have a good
place to live. My kids have
their friends. And, you know,
we hope that, little by little,
things turn around, but at least
I can say I'm not afraid
for tomorrow, because, you know,
we can make -- right now, we're
making it. We're doing
well.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the moment. And
in the tale of two markets,
that's more than millions
of still-underwater
homeowners can say.
From parts of the Boston area
that still haven't recovered
from the housing crisis, this is
economics correspondent Paul
Solman reporting for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, Pope
Francis continues his American
tour with a stop at a Catholic
school in New York City.
Since the 1960s, enrollment at
Catholic schools in the United
States has fallen by more than
50 percent. But the one Pope
Francis will visit and some
others like it have found ways
to keep their doors open.
The "NewsHour"'s April Brown has
our American Graduate report.
APRIL BROWN: She may only be in
fourth grade, but Ngueubou Kamwa
is becoming very media-savvy.
Over the past few weeks, she's
been interviewed by dozens of
news organizations at Our Lady
Queen of Angels Catholic school
in New York's East Harlem
neighborhood to talk about the
impending visit of the leader
of the Catholic Church.
Ngueubou will actually get to
meet Pope Francis when he stops
by the school, and she knows
quite a bit about him.
NGUEUBOU KAMWA, Student: And his
real name is actually Jorge
Mario Bergoglio. I know
that he's from Argentina. And
that he lives in Vatican City.
APRIL BROWN: Seventh-grader Jade
Fuentes has also been studying
the life of the pontiff.
JADE FUENTES, Student: He had
loved animals, and he still
does. Because he relates to
Saint
Francis, that's where
he had chosen his name.
APRIL BROWN: Jade's mother,
Nicole Fuentes, went to a
Catholic school a few blocks
away.
NICOLE FUENTES, Mother: This
is eighth grade gradation.
APRIL BROWN: Fuentes says the
area has changed a lot since
then.
NICOLE FUENTES: This
neighborhood was diverse. You
had Italian immigrants, Puerto
Rican,
African-American, Polish.
APRIL BROWN: Now it's largely
African-American and Hispanic,
with fewer Catholics and many
families that hit hard times
during the recession.
NICOLE FUENTES: Things just
happened economically to this
neighborhood, and we lost out on
a
lot of schools. And my school
was one of them. The church
still stands, but the school is
no longer here.
APRIL BROWN: St. Cecilia's is
just one of about 6,500 Catholic
schools that have closed
in the U.S. over the past few
decades. In the 1960s, there
were nearly 13,000 across
the country, educating more
than five million students.
Today, only about two million
students attend Catholic school,
and that's due to a variety
of reasons, including falling
birth rates among Catholics, the
rise of charter schools
in urban areas, and more
Catholics moving to the suburbs.
The cost of running these
schools has skyrocketed too,
leaving many struggling to stay
open.
CHARLES ZECH, Villanova
University: The parochial school
system as we have known it over
the
years is a dinosaur. They can't
possibly survive, given the
economics of the situation.
APRIL BROWN: Charles Zech is an
economics professor at Villanova
University who studies
how churches manage their
finances. Zech says one major
change in their work force has
hurt
Catholic schools, which are
historically known for both
academic rigor and strict
discipline.
CHARLES ZECH: Back in the day,
when parochial schools were
administered and most teachers
were nuns, the labor costs were
extremely low. You would be
hard-pressed to find any
nun teaching in parochial
schools today.
APRIL BROWN: Lay teachers now
fill most of those posts, and
get paid more than nuns,
who take a vow of poverty. Zech
says it can be very difficult to
manage these institutions
with fewer resources.
Historically, church leaders,
the educators, they don't have
financial backgrounds to be
able to manage this kind
of problem, do they?
CHARLES ZECH: Parochial schools
are under the purview of the
pastor of the parish. And,
for one thing, no priest I know
became a pastor because he
wanted to run a small business,
which is what a parish and a
school are. In addition,
seminaries do just a terrible
job
of training their guys
on management skills.
APRIL BROWN: One Catholic school
network that emerged in the
mid-1990s has found an
innovative
way to deal with the financial
challenges of parochial
education. There are now 30
Cristo
Rey schools across the country,
including Don Bosco in Maryland.
MAN: For you alone are the holy
one. You alone are the lord.
APRIL BROWN: Catholic
traditions, including mass, are
an important part of the day at
Don Bosco, which found a home in
a closed Catholic elementary
school.
One of the features that sets
these schools apart is that they
not only offer a college
preparatory education, but a
work-study program as well. Each
student is paired with an
employer
and works one day a week for all
four years, helping to offset
part of the $13,000-a-year
tuition.
Senior Carlos Lopez has spent
three years at the Washington,
D.C., area power company,
Pepco. He says he's become more
confident, invested in his own
education, and now has
skills that will be
useful in any workplace.
CARLOS LOPEZ, Student: I got to
practice how to introduce
myself, how to set a good
impression.
I learned that those are really
important out in the real world.
APRIL BROWN: The president of
Don Bosco Cristo Rey, Father
Michael Conway, says the purpose
of Catholic schools is much the
same as it has always been.
FATHER MICHAEL CONWAY,
President, Don Bosco Cristo Rey:
Here in this country Catholic
education came about as a result
of the huge immigration process
that took place in the
1800s and the cry of Catholic
families to have their own
schools. Many of them were
struggling within the public
school system to fit in. Many of
them were ostracized.
APRIL BROWN: Only now, he says,
many Catholic schools are just
serving different groups
of young people.
FATHER MICHAEL CONWAY: That's
why this is a unique school,
because its mission is
specifically
for those who are at the
poverty level or below.
APRIL BROWN: Our Lady Queen of
Angels in Harlem has a similar
mission, making sure a Catholic
education is within reach for
some of the city's most
disadvantaged students. But it's
found a different way to keep
the doors open by turning to a
strategy charter schools have
used for years, hiring a
management organization to run
things.
The Archdiocese of New York
inked an agreement with the
nonprofit Partnership for
Inner-City
Education to oversee the
educational and financial needs
of Our Lady Queen of Angels and
five
other Catholic schools
in Harlem and the Bronx.
Kathleen Porter-Magee is the
superintendent of the six
partnership schools.
KATHLEEN PORTER-MAGEE,
Superintendent, Partnership for
Inner-City Education: Over the
past several
years, I think the conversation
about urban Catholic education
has been one of pessimism,
of sadness that schools have
been closing. But I think we're
actually at a moment where
the conversation is and should
be about a renaissance and a
real revitalization.
APRIL BROWN: The partnership has
been working to improve
efficiency and share best
practices
among its six schools and
stabilize revenue streams
through a network of donors. The
schools
can't depend on tuition, because
more than two-thirds of the
students need and receive
scholarships.
KATHLEEN PORTER-MAGEE: One of
the things that Pope Francis has
really focused is bringing
the Catholic Church back to is
mission of service to
disadvantaged communities. And
I know that that is something
that has been part of what urban
Catholic schools have done
for generations and is certainly
something that they do here at
Our Lady Queen of Angels.
APRIL BROWN: And many believe
that's why the pope has chosen
to visit this school, which
has taught children since 1892,
many of them from immigrant
families like Ngueubou's.
Her father, Jean-Pierre Kamwa,
is originally from Cameroon.
JEAN-PIERRE KAMWA, Father: Our
neighborhood is predominantly
immigrant, low-income, and
having people who are out of
work, like myself. So, if the
pope comes to our neighborhood,
that means that he's going to
try to reach where they are.
APRIL BROWN: Ngueubou,
meanwhile, has been focusing on
what's she's expected to do when
she meets the pope.
NGUEUBOU KAMWA: When he comes in
the room, we're going to sing
the prayer of St. Francis
to him, and we might, like, talk
with him and pray with him.
APRIL BROWN: And as many in this
community hope Pope Francis'
visit to the U.S. will
bring Catholics back into the
fold, there is also belief that
his stop at Our Lady Queen
of Angels could spark a renewed
interest in Catholic education
as well.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
April Brown in New York City.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: Images of Syrian
refugees making their way across
Europe have dominated front
pages for several weeks. Less
visible, images coming from
inside
the war-torn country.
Illustrator Molly Crabapple has
been working with a writer,
Marwan Hisham, who sends her
cell phone images from Syria and
Iraq. The pair have published a
series of stunning scenes
from the region. You can find a
gallery of that work on our home
page.
And a new report shows that
children are getting adopted
more quickly today than a decade
ago.
Adoption advocates say that's
benefiting families. We lay out
the data from the latest study.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, we will look at
what's on the table for the
president of China's visit to
the
White house.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.